id: shrine-of-mian-umar-baba-chamkani
name: Shrine of Mian Umar Baba (Chamkani)
location: Chamkani, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan
category: Muslim Shrine
site_type: Khanqah   status: Active
principal_figure: Mian Muhammad Umar Chamkani   figure_type: Sufi saint   silsila: Naqshbandi
year_built:  (unknown)   note: Tomb and khanqah at Chamkani
figure_born: 1671   figure_died: 1776
event_year:    event_note: 
info_level: Moderate   support_level: Source-seeded
images: 1   prose words: 296   citations: 1

--- CURRENT Description ---
The shrine of Mian Muhammad Umar Baba lies at Chamkani, a village on the eastern outskirts of Peshawar about seven kilometres from the old city. Mian Umar (traditionally 1671-1776) was a Sufi of the Naqshbandi order — a scholar, poet, social reformer, and historian who is counted, together with Akhund Darweza Baba and the warrior-poet Khushal Khan Khattak, among the great literary and spiritual figures of the Mughal-era Pashtun frontier. Said to have been born near Lahore and to have lived to a great age, he attracted disciples from every rank of society; tradition holds that even Ahmad Shah Abdali (Durrani), the founder of the Afghan kingdom, visited him and became his devotee. Alam Faqri's *Tazkirah Awliya-e-Pakistan* gives a specific account of his death — in the month of Rajab, 1119 AH (approximately 1707-1708 CE) — and records his burial at the village of Chamkani, three miles from Peshawar, consistent with the shrine's location as given above; that date, however, falls roughly seven decades earlier than the 1776 death year given elsewhere in this entry, and the discrepancy is left unresolved here, with both figures reported rather than reconciled. His tomb at Chamkani grew into a shrine and khanqah that remains a place of resort for the surrounding population, drawing its largest crowds at the annual urs, held over the first Wednesday and Thursday of the Islamic month of Rajab, when devotees gather for sermons, collective dhikr, and na'at, and the langar (free kitchen) is served. Like a number of Sufi shrines in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, the site was targeted in militant attacks during the years of insurgency in the region, but it endures as an active centre of devotion. It complements the nearby shrine of the saint's contemporary Akhund Darweza Baba, also recorded in this dataset.

## Bibliography

- Alam Faqri, *Tazkirah Awliya-e-Pakistan*, vol. 2 (Lahore) — compendium of the saints of Pakistan.

--- CURRENT qa_note ---
Alam Faqri's *Tazkirah Awliya-e-Pakistan* (vol. 2) records the saint's death in Rajab 1119 AH (approximately 1707-1708 CE), roughly seven decades earlier than the 1776 death year already carried in this entry's Founded/Opened and figure_died fields (traditional lifespan 1671-1776). The two dates conflict and have not been reconciled; both are reported in the Description pending further sourcing.

--- CURRENT flags ---
DATE_SPLIT
